June the 4th, 1896. We are in College Station,
Texas, in the offices of the Chemical Engineering
Department. Ron, could you tell me a little bit
about your personal biography, your background,
how you came to be at Texas A&M?
Hey, Ron, it's June the 6th, Wednesday, June the
6th, 1996. And you're talking about the history
and development of the Department of Chemical
Engineering. And if you would, would you please
tell me your name for the record and a little
biographical information about your upbringing
and your early education and how you finally got to
A&M? OK. Ron Darby. I was born on September 12,
1932, in La Vida, Colorado. My father was
actually, he was an educator at the time. He was
teaching school, but later became more of a
traveling salesman. So we moved a lot in my early
years. In fact, I never lived in any one place more
than three years until I went to college. But I went
to grade school. In fact, I lived in Bryan in 1938,
39, and went to grade school here one semester in
Bryan back then. Did most of my grade schooling in
Houston, a little bit in Waco, and then junior high
in Beaumont, some in Houston and Beaumont, and
then moved to Atlanta, Georgia for high school.
Graduated from high school in Atlanta in 1950. And
then I applied for the Naval ROTC program when I was
in high school, and it's a scholarship program.
And you have to put down a choice of where you want to
go to school, three choices for second and third.
And I'd actually put down Georgia Tech and Rice and
Duke in that order. But then I got to thinking I'd
want to come back to Texas. So I went down and
changed my preference and put down Rice first and
then Georgia Tech and Duke. So I ended up going to
Rice. It's different. You know, that's why I went
to Texas in ROTC. Is that right? Sure is. I got there
in 52. That was exactly the reason. Tulane, I
think, had ROTC in Louisiana. You go to high school
in Louisiana? Yeah. Well, if I hadn't changed my
mind, I'd have gone to Georgia Tech. Of course, I'd
grown up a lot in Houston, and I wanted to go back to
Texas. So I went to Rice on an ROTC scholarship.
There was a five-year engineering BS program at
the time, so it was five years for a BS degree. And,
of course, the rules of the ROTC were that as soon as
you get a degree, you have to get your commission
and go on active duty. And Rice normally gave a BA
after four years and a BS after five years, so I had
to delay the BA degree until after my fifth year so I
wouldn't have to go on active duty. So at the end of
my fifth year, I got a BA and a BS and a commission all
at the same time. Where'd you go? Well, I went on
destroyers in the Pacific. Actually, before I
graduated, I had a round of interviews because I
wanted to pin down a job to go to, and I got out of the
Navy. So I talked to companies all over the
country, mostly East Coast and West Coast and
Texas and Oklahoma. And I picked a job with Dow
Chemical in Freeport. And I actually went down
there for about three weeks before I had to report
to my ship after I graduated. And so I had kind of an
orientation program. At that time, you'd have,
actually, you were on their rolls, so you had three
years of longevity for your Navy service. It was
three years after duty. That's right, three
years, because you were a full-time sergeant. I
had two years. And in fact, being the destroyers in
the Pacific, I requested destroyers in the
Pacific. I remember I got courier duty in the
Atlantic in the National Naval Air Force. Is that
right? Which was really great, but still, that's
not what I'd asked for. Well, that's what I'd asked
for, and I got it. So anyway, I was reported to a
destroyer, a structure class destroyer in San
Diego in 1955 when I graduated. And I was on that for
a couple of years with... Two or three trips to
Westpac, I was electronics officer and officer of
the deck, CIC officer, all in operations on the
destroyer, and also a navigator. In fact, I was
officer of the deck for general quarters and had a
division officer and navigator. ended up
relieving myself on the watch more often than not.
It was good. It was a good experience. I really
enjoyed it. Two or three trips to Westpac. On one of
them, we went to Brisbane, Australia, and we were
the first ships since the end of World War II into
Brisbane. And the Australians really went all
out. We had more parties to go to than we had people
to go to in Brisbane. It was a lot of fun. And then, of
course, the usual Hong Kong, Philippines, Japan,
and so forth. What was that, the big base in Japan?
Yakuska. Yakuska. Yeah, in and out of Yakuska and
Kobe.
But then after a couple years on that, I was
transferred to a commissioning detail for a radar
picket ship. Her ship was the Chandler 717. Of
course, Charlie Holland had been in the Navy,
so... He liked to tell some stories, too. But
anyway, the Chandler, this was the Newell 322, was
originally a World War II destroyer escort that
had been mothballed and then resurrected in Korea
as a weather ship to the Coast Guard. And then it was
mothballed again in Florida. And then they towed
it around to Long Beach and put it in commission as a
radar picket ship. And I was the CIC officer there
in charge of all the electronics equipment and the
radars and all of that. And we had, at the time, the
state-of-the-art radars. Of course, the
long-range air search radars, the objective was
to serve picket duty out in the Pacific for
long-range search. Were you offshore a lot? Well,
I spent about six months in Long Beach putting the
thing in commission. And then it was stationed at
Pearl Harbor. So I was at Pearl for six months. And
during that period, we had one picket tour, which
really ran from Midway to Kodiak, Alaska. So we ran
back and forth there for about three weeks. And
then that's the only tour I had before I got out. And
then when I got out, I got out in May of 58. And
meanwhile, I decided I wanted to go back to
graduate school because a lot of stuff that I'd
like to know, I didn't know. and I wanted to get more
training and education. So I wrote to Dow and asked
them... Excuse me, your degree from Rice, your
B.S. was in... Chemical Engineering. Chemical
Engineering. So actually I have a B.A. and a B.S. in
Rice. The B.A. is undesignated, but the B.S. is
here. So I wrote to Dow and asked them if I could just
come down and work for the summer until classes
started in September. And they said, yeah, that's
okay, no problem. So I went down there the first of
June, reported for work, And they called me in, and
this was in 1958, and that was the biggest downturn
the chemical industry has ever had. I mean, before
or since, that was the recession. And Dow had been
given a mandate to lay off 10% of the employees
across the board in every division. So they called
me and said, look, we're laying people off. We
really can't take you on this summer. We're very
sorry. Here's $300 severance pay. Good luck. So
they sent me home with $300 in my pocket. And I went
back to Houston, and I got a job that summer working
for Bill Akers, who was head of the kidney
department at Rice. He had a consulting project
having to do with heat transfer and heavy oils in
him, too. So me and another student worked on that
that summer, and it was a good experience. I
remember when I was a student, my students were
geology, I guess, exploration. Yeah, it hit them
hard. Oh, there was no marketplace then. That's
right. It really wiped it out. But anyway, I was in
graduate school at Rice then until 61. I finished
all my work actually in late 60, in the fall of 60.
finished it actually in october got married in
december and i got married in november and in
december my wife and i left on a freighter for
england i applied for a nsf postdoc scholarship
which i got for a year in england in cambridge and
they gave a total of six cents travel for one person
to get to where you were going. So I shopped around
for the cheapest way to get to England, which was a
freighter. So I booked us on a Lykes freighter to go
to England, which was an experience. The rules
said that you had to leave from the last US port and
get off at the first UK port, but they wouldn't tell
you where that was because it's basically
unscheduled, so you have to change at the last
minute. And sure enough, this freighter was
supposed to leave from Galveston, but they
changed their schedule and they went to
Galveston, but they had to go to Corpus to pick up
some freight. So we had to, even though we were in
Houston, the freighter was in Galveston, we had to
go to Corpus to get on the ship. And it was a two-week
trip from Corpus to Liverpool. And we got to
Liverpool in the middle of December and then went
to Cambridge. And that was a fun time. I did a
research project there with a fellow on nuclear
oil. studying the rate of growth of bubbles in a
nuclear boiling system. And that was my first kind
of independent research project. And that was a
lot of fun. We traveled around, took a couple trips
on the continent and all, bought a British car, The
place we went, they thought we were British, so
that was... One year. Yeah, exactly a year. Came
back the following December, and it was a really
cold year. We had a flat in Cambridge that was
heated electrically, and our electric bills were
kind of high, and we asked our landlady why they
were so high, and my wife did, and the landlady
says, well, my dear... can I ask you a personal
question? She said, well, I guess so. She said,
well, just how often do you bathe? We had an
electrified water heater and everything. She
says, well, we bathe every day. She says, my dear,
don't you realize you're washing all the natural
oils out of your skin? I think once a week is a norm.
So anyway, she was a great landlady. When we left
there, actually, she owed us a little return on our
deposit, which she sent a check for pounds, which I
couldn't negotiate in the bank. So I sent it back to
her and asked her if she would use, please use that
money to buy me a book. And I told her what book I
wanted. She did. She bought the book and she sent it
to me. So it was a long time. But then after I came
back from England, I, actually before I went to
England, before I knew that I had the NSF post-doc
scholarship, I had gone through some interviews
to pin down a job. And I concentrated mostly on
texas and oklahoma at that time but then when i got
the scholarship and i went to england i came back
and i had another round of interviews so that's my
third interviewing round and i i took a job with
lean temp cobalt ltv research center in grand
prairie and that was during jimmy lane's heyday
you probably remember jimmy lane he was notorious
they say that jimmy lane never actually graduated
from high school But he put together such
complicated financing deals with all these
companies that he bought and sold that a lot of
people couldn't understand that it was so
complicated. And a lot of people wondered if Jimmy
understood it himself. But he was an amazing guy.
So he was on the same deal with you? Oh, yeah. I met
Jimmy. I talked to Jimmy. And he was an interesting
guy. But I was working on the fuel cell research at
the time. LTV, of course, in the space and aircraft
business, wanted to have some expertise in fuel
cells, even though they didn't have any
production facilities for them. They needed to
keep abreast of that technology, so that's
basically why I was doing that. But one year, LTV
would decide they were going to diversify, so
Jimmy went out and he bought up Friedrich Air
Conditioners and a bunch of other companies that
didn't necessarily relate to aerospace. Then the
next year, they decided they were going to
specialize So they sold off all these companies to
concentrate on government business. So it was
going back and forth. Yeah, I remember watching
the LTV. Yeah, it was Wheeler Dealer. In fact,
Jimmy Lane made his, the word was that he made his
fortune in World War II. He was an electrical
contractor, and he bought up a lot of surplus
aluminum cables from Chance Law Aircraft Company
at like pennies on the dollar. and he made a killing
by marketing that cable, and he ended up buying the
company he bought the cable from. I've heard
people doing that with iron, you know, just all
iron. Yeah, scrap iron. But anyway, when I was in
graduate school at Rice, Leo Durbin and I and two
other graduate students roomed together in a
two-bedroom apartment, So Leo and I shared one
bedroom, and the other two guys shared another
bedroom. And Leo graduated, he started the year
before I did, and he graduated a little earlier
than I did, and he wanted to go into teaching. So Leo
actually wanted to go to work for the University of
Texas, and he went over and he had an interview with
John McKetta. And John is really an interesting
guy. Everybody loves John. But John always said
later, that he really wanted to hire Leo except
during the interview Leo went to sleep when he was
talking to them and so he couldn't he couldn't
offer him a job because he went to sleep during the
interview but anyway Leo was hired here played
back huh yeah John McKetta M-C-K-E-T-T-A yeah
John McKetta he's a classic over there He's still
active. He's retired, but he's still... He
recently gave a million dollars to the community
department. Who was that? He gave them a big party
and all that. He was editor of a book series, and I
published my first book, so I knew him. But anyway,
Leo was hired here at A&M while I was off in England.
I was working here. When I went to work for LTV, I
wrote up a paper on the research that I did in
England on nuclear boiling. and published it in
Chemical Engineering Science. And Leo saw the
paper, and they were looking for a new faculty
member, so Leo put my name in the pod with Lindsey
and Holland. So Holland called me, and I'd always
kind of wanted to get into teaching. In fact, even
when I was in the Navy, I set up kind of some
instruction courses for the electronics
technicians to try to teach them some basic
electricity and stuff. And I enjoyed all that, so I
really wanted to get into it. So, but really, it was
not your initiative so much. No, that's right. I
just got a call out of the blue one day from Leo
wanting to know if I was interested in a teaching
job. Let me back up. When you were interviewing
that person in his early years out of Rice, what
were you looking at? What was happening, going on
in Texas that particularly related to chemical
engineers? Well, I guess that was kind of a heyday
of chemical engineering in a way, because the
chemical engineers were The cream of the crop of
the students in most universities, they were top
notch and getting the best jobs. And the chemical
industry was really mushrooming all over the
place. It was in really a growth mode. And
actually, I was looking more for location than
specific jobs. I had interviews all the way from
Standard Oil in New Jersey and DuPont in Delaware
to Chevron in California. Dow and Texaco, mostly
petroleum oil companies and petrochemical
companies. I talked with Dow. I had several job
offers from Exxon and Texaco. A lot of them were
petroleum production areas and those were like
engineering and stuff like that. In fact, when I
went to work for I kind of like the Dallas area, so my
last rounds I was kind of concentrating on Dallas
or Oklahoma. I like Dallas and Tulsa, so I kind of
concentrated on companies in those two towns. And
I had a job offer from Mobile Field Research
Laboratory outside of Dallas in Duncanville,
which was a nice job. I was really torn between that
and LTV. But LTV looked a little more exotic, a
little different. Yeah, very, very. Yeah, a
little more. avant-garde, I guess, or whatever,
so I thought I'd try that, which may or may not have
been a good thing. I published two or three papers
on the work that I did up there, so it came out okay on
the fuel cell stuff I was doing, mostly on
theoretical models and stuff. But then I got this
call from Leo, and so I decided to follow up on it,
and came down for an interview, and They offered me
the job, so I decided to take it. Did you take a pay
cut? Yeah, I did. I would think so. Yeah, I took, I
guess, about 20% pay cut when I came here tonight.
So that was it. Was that a good idea? Well, she
pretty well went along with what I wanted.
Meanwhile, we had our first child was born in
Dallas. She was born... just about a week before
Kennedy was killed. And then we moved from there in
65.
Then we
had another one after we came here in 66. Second,
Her son was born in April of 66, and we've got two
kids. My wife died of cancer in 89, and my kids now
are growing and growing. Where are they now? Well,
my daughter is married, and she and her husband are
in graduate school at Virginia Tech. She got an
accounting degree here, and then they both worked
for a while in Florida, and she picked up an MBA
degree at Florida Atlantic University over
there. And they decided they wanted to get into
academic English. I had never suspected. Yeah,
you never know about that. My son's just moved here
this past year. He's working with me in education.
Is that right? Well, my daughter wanted to. I
thought he wanted to be a coach. Yeah. Well, that's
what my son wants to do. In fact, he got his degree
here in kinesiology and a minor in biology. And he
always wanted to be a basketball player. Carl did.
And he coached me back at Coppell. Did he? couple of
years and did a nice job. His wife didn't like it up
there. Well, my son moved to Houston, got a job in a
junior high school in the Spring School of
History, Spring Bank School of History, which was
actually mostly a minority area. But he coached
basketball and some football. And then he got
married to a girl who had a master's degree in
veterinary pharmacology here in Houston. And she
was working with MD Anderson down there at the
time. And she got a good job offer from Eli Willey up
in Indiana, just outside of Indianapolis. So they
moved up there. And actually, they split up last
year, about a year ago. So he's on his own. He's
still up there in Greenfield. He's outside of
Indianapolis. He taught for a while there. In
fact, he had one year in the Indianapolis School
District in the inner city school. which was a pure
nightmare. I mean, the kids were wild,
uncontrolled, no discipline, and it was just
terrible. He got out of his class as a kid, but he
hasn't gotten a permanent teaching job since.
He's been working for the city of Greenfield in
their recreation department. He supervises
their softball leagues. all their athletic
competition and stuff like that. Well, I think
he's kind of torn. He kind of likes it there, and
he's used to it there. He's got a lot of inertia.
He's not very adventurous. He hasn't rejected
them. It's hard to get a job long distance,
particularly teaching jobs. You pretty well have
to be on the spot and make a lot of contacts to get in
the system. He's been trying to get back in the
school system over the years. He also has a second
job with a boys club. So he's got kind of two
part-time jobs, basically. I bet you he'll get
back in. My daughter always liked the applied
areas in business. So she wanted to get in a program
where she could teach applications in business.
She actually taught a little bit in a vocational
program in Florida when she was in there. Then she
found a program in the voc-ed department at
Virginia Tech that had a business class here. So
that sounded good to her, so she enrolled in that.
She was in there for a couple years. She actually
got a doctorate of education degree through that
program. But she was really disappointed with the
standards in the voc-ed program. She said she had
fellow graduate students that she didn't know
whether they could walk or chew gum at the same
time. And that was really poor. In fact, since
then, just about the time she got her degree,
Virginia Tech, as part of their budget control
procedures, wiped out the College of Education,
the whole college. The whole College of
Education? Yeah, the whole College of Education.
So meanwhile, she had transferred back into the
business college, and she's working on a PhD in
strategic management now. And her husband got a
master's degree here in landscape architecture,
and he's working on a PhD in landscape
architecture there. And it's kind of ironic
because His father lost his wife to cancer about a
year before I did. And then he and my daughter got
together and got married. And then his father was
on the faculty here in architecture, Ralph
Eccleston.
And so he was, in fact, he and I share a common
birthday. He's three years older than I am, but we
were born on the same day of the year. And he had a
second marriage, which didn't work out. And I had a
second marriage, which didn't work out. And so he
actually moved into my house and lived there for a
couple of years with me and my house. He was
actually on a nine-month appointment, so he went
back to Virginia in the summertime and then
decided just to go ahead and retire this past year.
So he's back there full-time. His family, and I was
raised from Virginia, of course, my wife's, his
son, my wife's husband, has got three brothers and
a sister, and all of them went on the back of
Virginia there, so most of them are family ties.
Yeah. It's interesting to see what happens to your
kid. Yeah. And you don't know why. Their life is
more complicated than ours, I think, though, I
don't know. But you kind of ask, why did I get into
chemical engineering? And I tell students this a
lot. Because when I was in high school, my favorite
course actually, well, I had three favorite
courses. I liked my mechanical drawing course. I
had a good chemistry course, and I probably
learned more from the typing course than anything
else from the practical matter. I had the same
experience. Is that right? I had drawing. I loved
it. And typing. I had two or three years of drawing.
I loved it. And typing. I was good at typing. My
typing instructor told me she thought it would be a
good idea if I dropped the class at a certain point
because she knew I wouldn't be making very good
grades. or something, and so I dropped it. But it
was a good experience. I got up to over 60 words a
second in that typing course, which just came in a
lot of really handy. But I was kind of the teacher's
pet in the chemistry course. I'll never forget my
high school chemistry teacher. His name was
Haichi, very unusual name. Haichi? I think he was
Slavic or something. H-I-T-C-H-E-W. I'm not sure
exactly. But he was a crusty old character. It was a
good course. But actually, I envisioned myself as
being mechanically inclined. In fact, I thought
at one time I wanted to work as an architect. And I
worked one summer when I was in high school for an
architect. And when I saw what was involved, I
decided I wanted to be an architect, which was
good. But then when I went to college, I was leaning
toward mechanical engineering. But at Rice, you
didn't have to prepare a major to your sophomore
year. You just divided people into science,
engineering, and liberal arts. Two categories.
So I went through the science, engineering route.
And while I was there, the word around the campus
was that chem engineering was the toughest
program on the campus. It was the most
challenging. So I said, by God, I think I'll try it
to see if I can do it. So I got into it more as a
challenge than anything else. Of course, I did
like my chemistry course, but I wasn't really all
that in love with chemistry. But it was a
challenge, and I got into it, and I enjoyed it. But
I'm kind of a frustrated mechanical engineer,
probably more than anything else. I probably use
more physics than chemistry in the stuff I've
done, because I'm more into fluid mechanics, and
rheology, and viscoelastic materials, and , and
stuff. There's a lot more physics involved than
chemistry . And in some places, I've been doing
some background reading, chemical engineering
really came out of physics departments. Some
places gave them petroleum, and in some places, of
course, a lot of places, as here, chemical
departments. Well, you know, back when I was in
school, there was not that much of a distinction
between a physical chemist and a chemical
engineer. In fact, in Europe, they don't make a lot
of distinction. They have chemical physics and
physical chemistry and chem engineers, and they
all are more or less the same kind of thing with a
little different slant. They're all very applied
programming. And physical chemistry used to be an
applied course where you actually learned about
vapor-liquid equilibrium and surface tension
and diffusivity and practical physical
properties. And it was a good, useful course for
chemical engineers. But physical chemistry now
has gotten so esoteric that all they want to do is
talk about spectral analysis, energy levels,
quantum mechanics, statistical mechanics, and
things like that. And it doesn't deal so much with
the tangibles anymore like it used to. Has
chemical engineering changed in its context
approach and its clientele, let's say, here at
A&M. Chemical engineering hasn't undergone any
revolutionary, drastic changes. It's undergone
a lot of evolutionary changes, but no real
revolutionary. Again, of course, there's always
more information. You try to cram more and more
into the curriculum, but you've got to take
something out when you put something in. So the
curriculum... Things that used to be taught in
graduate school now are moved down to senior
level, just like high school. When we were going
through school, nobody took calculus until they
got to college. Now, most all high school kids are
taking calculus. So that kind of thing is
permeating the whole system. But I think I have
seen a change in the students since I've been here
for 30 years. You probably saw a change, too. When I
first came, the enrollment of A&M was about 8,000
students, and it was largely a rural-type
atmosphere. Most of the students were from rural
or small-town environments. They had a strong
work ethic. They might not have been the
superstars in the classroom, down to the kids. We
still get quite a few of those. But now we're
probably drawing a lot more from the urban areas. I
guess Harris County provides more students than
any other place else. And so we have more students.
You know, that's what Lindsey said. He called it a
country boy school. But, you know, with respect,
he said most of the kids were first-generation
college students. And so they were That's right. I
think that's been a strong deprivation. In fact,
one of our former students, who was in one of my
first classes that I taught when I was here, who is a
well-respected manager for Dow now, was on our
advisory committee for some time, and paid sure to
conduct a survey at Dow one time, to see if there
were any correlations between the grades student
made in school and their performance on the job
after they went to work. And they found that there
was no correlation at all with grades. But he said
that there was somewhat of a correlation between
their job performance and their socioeconomic
background, in that the students that came from
the rural and small town environments tended to do
better than those that came from urban
environments. That's interesting. But there was
no correlation there with grades. In fact,
there's the old story, you know, that when you
graduate, the A students will work for the C
students. Probably because the C students had to
work harder to get their grades than the A students
did. And that work ethic meant more on the job than
the actual grades. And I think that's becoming
more important now. And the students are
realizing it less. The students are putting a lot
more emphasis on getting grades than learning.
Whereas in previous years, they would put the
emphasis on learning. And if the grade came,
that's OK. But the main thing was to learn the
material. Now the main thing is to get a grade. And
if they learn something, that's OK. But the main
thing is to get that grade. So the emphasis has
changed a lot. And I guess, too, in part, that's
because the deck's stacked that way. Yeah, that's
right. The system drives it. A good C student was as
employable as an A student. That's right. In fact,
the A&M regulations now define A as excellent, B as
good, C as satisfactory. They used to have
numericals, but they don't have that anymore. But
unfortunately, a lot of students and a lot of
instructors look at C's as unsat grades because a
student with a C average graduating has a hard time
getting a job. So they look at C as basically unsat.
And I'm afraid that we're turning some students
out that are really unsat that have C averages. So,
anyway, that's one of my soapboxes. It's way
inflation. Yeah. The guy's name is without a
shirt? Page. Page. Page. S-H-I-R-T-E-N.
Oh, there's
probably a few of them,
I guess. come through mine, but you kind of lose
track of them. Yeah, sure. Not many of them that I
have really followed. I know this guy, and I didn't
interview him, but David Chapman did. Jim Mathis.
Jim Mathis. Yeah. I think he was before my time as
far as being a student. He was on our direct
advisor. In fact, we had another a former student
who was on
our advisory committee.
But when he went through school, he always said
that my course was the best course that he had. It's
really one of the more practical courses. And
after he graduated, he actually sent me back $275
donations directly to me for support of my my
research project. And that's the only grant that
I've had that was a personal thing just for me. And
it was right out of his pocket, sending it to me.
What do you talk most of the time? Well, fluid
mechanics, actually I taught... That's the basic
fluid mechanics course? Right, junior level
fluid mechanics. I taught that more than anyone
else. That's my baby, so to speak. In fact, I just
published my second book, which is Chemical
Engineering and Fluid Mechanics, which is an
outgrowth of teaching that course for 30 years.
It's got several hundred problems in the book,
most of which are old exam problems from previous
exams. You have a lot of, I'm sure, non-chemical
engineers, all engineers coming in. No, this is
just for chemical engineers. Actually, it covers
a lot of stuff that the other... fluid mechanics
courses don't cover like in civil and mechanical.
They have their own fluids courses. We get into not
only flows and pipes and pumps and tanks and
pressure vessels and stuff, but we also cover
non-Newtonian, Newtonian, and compressible
fluids and gases. And we also cover fluid-solid
separations like falling particles and
sedimentation and filters and fluid ion states
and things like that. So it's a pretty good scope of
material. but i've i've taught everything from
freshman to
graduate
students well actually since i came here i've
started probably seven or eight courses from
scratch i started a graduate course in rheology
which is my primary research area i started
undergraduate courses in polymer engineering
and corrosion and electrochemical engineering
and transport phenomena. I taught and started a
graduate course, also an undergraduate course in
process safety engineering. Graduate courses in
process safety engineering and applied
electrochemistry and polymer engineering.
And it's interesting, of all those courses that I
have started, I never took a course in any of those
subjects when I was in school. All of those I
learned on my own, but the fundamental training I
got in school was obviously
invaluable in learning that stuff. Well, that's
right. This is sometimes it's hard to make the
students realize that You're not going to learn
everything you need to know in your coursework.
You'll just get a good background that enables you
to learn after you get out. In fact, I saw a quote
which I think was attributed to Mark Twain. I don't
know if he originated it, but the quote is that the
whole aim of education is just to enable you to
continue learning. And I use that quite
frequently with the students. How is our
department interactive or compared to, let's
say, the Texas Institute of Chemical
Engineering? Has there been a TA going there?
There really is not a lot of interchange between
the two departments. You know, occasionally
we'll have seminar speakers back and forth. But
there's not any regular type of contact between
the two departments.
So they... They have had generally a better
reputation, a higher reputation than we had in the
research community. And they've had more
financial support in that they've had a lot of
professorships and chairs over there from
donated money to their department, much more than
we have. So we've been known more as the practical
level of engineering, and they've been more of the
theoretical level. Just like we're the
conservative school and they're the liberal
school. And I suspect our graduates have done as
well over there. Oh, yeah, at least as well. And
probably produced more. It's kind of ironic,
though, because our graduates historically have
been at a premium of industry, but not so well
recruited by other graduate programs for
research. So we've been known more for our
undergraduate training than our graduate
training. And of course, A&M in recent years has
tried to reverse that trend for at least to become
more renowned in research. And I think even though
they claim otherwise, I think there has been some
detrimental effects on the undergraduate
program as a result of that heavy emphasis.
Because the faculty are not dumb. They know which
side their bread is buttered on. And if they know
all the emphasis, for raises and promotions and
whatever goes into their efforts in the graduate
program, that's where they're going to spend most
of their time. It doesn't pay to teach. That's
right. And they know it, and they act that way. You
try to get them to watch. And I've been
semi-frustrated in that a lot of the things that I
have been active in are not the things that are on
the brownie point list of the administration.
Because I spent a lot of years as an undergraduate
advisor That doesn't carry a lot of weight. I have
developed an accelerated BS master's program in
the last five or six years, which has really taken
off and become popular. This is a program that
allows our better undergraduates to start
working on a master's degree before they finish
their bachelor's. But they do a project with a
company in the industry site over two summers or
equivalent, which is typically the summer before
and after their senior year. And so I recruit the
companies. I line up the projects. I recruit the
students. I match the students and the companies
up. And I supervise a lot of the students. And I try
to get other faculty involved in supervising the
students to get them out in contact with industry.
And it's accelerated. That's not a good idea. It's
accelerated because we have three Kimmy elective
courses in the program that students take from a
list of prescribed courses. And the students in
this program can take graduate courses for these
electives and get double credit for the electives
and graduates for the master's degree. So in
principle, if they were on a four-year BS track,
they could get a master's in five years with
essentially the equivalent of almost a year's
worth of good practical industrial experience
thrown in. And it's really a win-win situation for
everybody but me and the faculty. The students in
industry, I think it's great. We had a total of
about 20 students in the program. When you first
came here, tell me a little bit about Joel Powell
and the department and how it fit in the context of
engineering and engineering. Well, it's
interesting because back then, TEAS, the
Engineering Experiment Station, consisted of
Fred Benson and Harry Whitmore. Harry was kind of
the administrator for TEAS. The college got so
much money for the experiment station, and Harry
and Fred would dole that money out to the
departments, and the departments would use it for
supporting the research programs themselves.
And that was TEAS. Now TEAS is this humongous
organization with hundreds of employees and all
their human resources and accountants and
everything else. It's like night and day. the way
it's been formalized and bureaucrat and
bureaucratized. Has that helped the faculty, the
chemical engineer? I don't think it has, really. I
think the money was more effectively utilized
back then. There wasn't as much money going out.
But what there was was used more effectively.
Because there wasn't as much use for the . Yeah, I
think that's one of the things that kind of
stimulated me to become somewhat independent of
it. I was in my first research project, which we
were known for, and it was with Joanne's
population. Yeah, Victor and I were working
together, and I think it was a $50,000 big bucks for
history, you know. And we ended up with $25,000. I
said,
well, you know. So, once I decided to break, I know
the research is on my own. It's independent. I've
got a lot more research independently as a small
business than I think I ever would have gotten
before. Of course, history doesn't get that kind
of stuff. That's right. Well, the bureaucracy can
be stifling. It can be, yeah. Spend all your time
wrestling with it. Is Holland a pretty good
department? Yeah, Holland is... Well, he's very
egotistical type of guy. I haven't interviewed
him yet. I'm going to. Yeah, and I kind of always
equated your parallels between Holland and
Charlie de Gaulle. They say that any time de Gaulle
said France, he meant de Gaulle. Any time Charlie
said chemical engineering, he meant Charlie de
Gaulle. So Charlie, he was kind of a... Sort of the
benevolent dictator type of administrator. He
had absolute control of everything. Every penny
that went through the department, he had his fist
on. But he didn't account for it as carefully as he
could have, because there were years where things
kind of fell through the cracks. Basically,
though, since you've been here, I assume you've
been doing programs, departments, faculty and
students have been expanding? Oh yeah, yeah. I
don't remember exactly how many faculty we had
when I came, but I think we could probably count
them on the fingers of both hands. But now we have,
you know, 23, 4, 5 or higher. We just hired three
more to start next year. Is that right? New
addition? New position? Well, we've lost two or
three recently, so it's a net gain of maybe one or
two. Apparently, now, there wasn't a whole lot of
turnover in your field, I guess, over the years.
There was not any turnover to speak of. There was
not? Not here, no. I just assumed there would have
been. Our faculty was very stable for a long time.
In fact, until I was here for almost 20 years, I
think we'd only had maybe one or two people that had
left that were hired. Because I guess I was
thinking that the jobs and the salary scales
outside would have been possibly so much higher
that it would have lured a lot of people. That's
true. They were, but there's not many people. You
realize that when you got into the game. Yeah,
that's right. That's why you didn't come. You
didn't come here for the money. That's right. You
weren't going to leave with the money necessarily
unless you didn't like it. As long as you're
enjoying what you're doing, you're okay with it.
Our teaching loads, I remember one semester I
think I was teaching five sections. Now one of
those was in the graduate extension. We used to
teach our graduate courses at various industrial
sites around the state. So that was considered an
overload, an extra load in addition to our
original graduate course load. So I remember one
semester I was teaching five. classes on campus
and one class off campus. And this was like four
different courses, I think, three or four
different courses. I think we were 15 hours in the
first thing. I know I was.